content/pages/support.rst, before:

:title: Help
:date: 2013-09-20
:lang: en


Mailing list
------------

You can get help with CsoundQt on the main Csound Mailing List, but for CsoundQt specific issues, you can join the `CsoundQt Users Mailing List <https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/qutecsound-users>`_, for ideas, bug reports and suggestions. This mailing list is also available as a `Forum on Nabble <http://qutecsound-users.829572.n3.nabble.com/>`_.


Wiki
----
The `CsoundQt Wiki <https://github.com/CsoundQt/CsoundQt/wiki>`_ offers a number of helpful articles. It is also open for contributions by users  - create a new article and share your knowledge!


Documentation
-------------
The `Documentation pages <|filename|doc.md>`_ are still not complete, but hopefully CsoundQt is intuitive enough that it should be enough to get you started. There is also some information on the Help menu in the CsoundQt application.


Bug reports and feature requests
--------------------------------
Errors can be filed and wishes for enhancements desciribed at `issues tracker <https://github.com/CsoundQt/CsoundQt/issues>`_. 


Video tutorials
---------------
Alex Hofmann has created a series of video tutorials for CsoundQt:

.. youtube:: P5OOyFyNaCA
.. youtube:: 0XcQ3ReqJTM
.. youtube:: KgYea5s8tFs
.. youtube:: 8zszIN_N3bQ

Other video tutorials:

.. youtube:: KKlCTxmzcS0
.. youtube:: O9WU7DzdUmE

Commit message:

added more hints to portaudio issue

content/pages/support.rst, after:

:title: Help
:date: 2013-09-20
:lang: en

Trouble shooting
----------------
Have a look at the `Tips and Tricks <https://csoundqt.github.io/pages/tips-and-tricks.html>`_ site in the `Documentation pages <|filename|doc.md>`_ if you experience an issue with CsoundQt.


Mailing list
------------

You can get help with CsoundQt on the main Csound Mailing List, but for CsoundQt specific issues, you can join the `CsoundQt Users Mailing List <https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/qutecsound-users>`_, for ideas, bug reports and suggestions. This mailing list is also available as a `Forum on Nabble <http://qutecsound-users.829572.n3.nabble.com/>`_.


Wiki
----
The `CsoundQt Wiki <https://github.com/CsoundQt/CsoundQt/wiki>`_ offers a number of helpful articles. It is also open for contributions by users  - create a new article and share your knowledge!


Documentation
-------------
The `Documentation pages <|filename|doc.md>`_ are still not complete, but hopefully CsoundQt is intuitive enough that it should be enough to get you started. There is also some information on the Help menu in the CsoundQt application.


Bug reports and feature requests
--------------------------------
Errors can be filed and wishes for enhancements desciribed at `issues tracker <https://github.com/CsoundQt/CsoundQt/issues>`_. 


Video tutorials
---------------
Alex Hofmann has created a series of video tutorials for CsoundQt:

.. youtube:: P5OOyFyNaCA
.. youtube:: 0XcQ3ReqJTM
.. youtube:: KgYea5s8tFs
.. youtube:: 8zszIN_N3bQ

Other video tutorials:

.. youtube:: KKlCTxmzcS0
.. youtube:: O9WU7DzdUmE
